Staff Reporter The African National Congress (ANC) led by the Secretary-General Cde. Gwede Mantashe and the Popular Front for the Liberation of Saguia el-Hamra and Río de Oro (POLISARIO), led by President Brahim Ghali of the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic (SADR) have met at the ANC headquarters, Chief Albert Luthuli House in Johannesburg. The ANC and the POLISARIO Front enjoy longstanding fraternal ties, and the ANC once again affirmed its support the Sahrawi people’s right to independence and self-determination. President Ghali and his delegation welcomed the opportunity to interact with the ANC and reflect that his organization and the people of Western Sahara continue to draw strength and lessons from our struggle against colonialism and apartheid. President Ghali paid tribute to the legacies of successive collective ANC leaders as led by Cde. Nelson Mandela and Cde. OR Tambo, who were unwavering in their support for the Sahrawi people’s right to self-determination. The then nascent relations between POLISARIO and the ANC were cemented by Cde. Tambo’s visit to the SADR in 1988. During this visit, POLISARIO donated arms and ammunition confiscated from Moroccan troops to the ANC. The two organizations concurred that Morocco’s actions in the Western Sahara bear similarities to the apartheid policies of the Nationalist Party government. Following his visit to the SADR, Cde. Tambo himself noted: “we were also very surprised by the similarity of the nature of the struggle of the Sahrawi people and the people of South Africa.” The freedom struggle of the Sahrawi and their right to an independent homeland in the Western Sahara is one of the world’s longest and most intractable conflicts. Over four decades since the annexation of Western Sahara by Morocco and Mauritania the peace process is in tatters, and the Sahrawi people continue to suffer the harsh realities of war and displacement, poverty and inequality. The ANC’s Secretary-General underscored the urgency of the implementation by Morocco of successive UN resolutions regarding this conflict; most importantly the holding of a referendum on self-determination. The United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO) was established in 1991 to oversee a referendum in which the people of the Western Sahara would choose between independence and integration with Morocco. Successive delays and postponements by Morocco, aided by France, have meant the referendum has still not taken place. Within the context of the delayed referendum, the SADR delegation expressed concern regarding Morocco’s application for re-admission to the African Union (AU), a matter likely to be on the agenda at the upcoming 28th AU Summit to be held in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia from 22 – 31 January 2017. The SADR and ANC representatives noted that the Western Sahara remained occupied by Morocco, making the Western Sahara the last bastion of colonialism in Africa. This should not be forgotten when the AU considers Morocco’s application for readmission. That a number of South African companies are doing business with Morocco, and even have operations in the Western Sahara, was raised as a point of concern. President Ghali’s delegation informed the ANC that attempts were underway to undermine the process of a prospective referendum such as the influx of people from Morocco into the Western Sahara, with the aim of being registered as voters. This has the potential to seriously destabilize the referendum process when it takes place, and could possibly result in a return to armed conflict. It was further noted that Morocco has been pressuring a number of countries to stop providing humanitarian aid to the SADR, which was also questionable. In the light of Morocco’s recalcitrance with regards to the Western Sahara issue, both organizations concurred that South Africa could play a leading role in advancing the interests of the Sahrawi people at the AU by lobbying other African countries to ensure that Morocco’s readmission to the body is subject to strict conditions, and that Morocco respect all AU resolutions regarding the Western Sahara. The ANC affirmed its support for the Sahrawi people’s right to pursue all paths of resistance in their quest for liberation, led by POLISARIO. Both parties concurred on the need to host a conference on solidarity with the people of the Western Sahara.        