The African National Congress first adopted the strategy and tactics document at its 1969 Morogoro conference. It analyses the socio-political environment in which the organisation has to operate.  It offers an analysis of the domestic and global developments and consequently outlines tactics and strategies to be employed in the prosecution of the current phase of the struggle (the national democratic revolution). This is critical given the restlessness of the ‘motive forces’ that clearly have “lost confidence in the capacity of the ANC” – as shown in the 2016 local government elections – to carry out the agenda of fundamental  social transformation.  This was shown either through non-participation or by voting for parties that have broken away from the ANC. The strategy and tactics adopted at the 2017 conference has provided a road map to guide all the structures of the organisation across women, youth, veterans as well as branches, provincial and national structures.  All have to play their part to ensure that the organisation wins the 2019 general elections. This also applies to our allies in the tripartite alliance plus SANCO. Forces aligned against the ANC have not hidden their desire to dislodge the ANC from power. It is indisputable that the ANC is by far the biggest and most supported political organisation in South Africa. It has held the country together since the dawn of democracy in 1994. The further weakening of the ANC will invariably undermine the state and the democratic system, as a whole.  Key characteristics of the strategy and tactics document are:  The main content of the NDR remains the liberation of Africans in particular and blacks in general. This means uplifting the quality of life of all South Africans, especially the poor This is being affected by the distributive mechanism offered by the comprehensive security system, the old age pension and other grants, etc, that provide a safety net for the poor and infirm and other vulnerable people.  The need to build a developmental state that has the capacity to intervene in the economy in the interest of higher rates of growth and sustainable development Mobilising the people as a whole to act as their own liberators through participatory democracy. Accordingly the ANC will continue its attempts to build a democracy with social content There is a need to continue to change the structure, system and design of the South African economy which, 23 years after democracy, continues to be dominated by monopoly capital. The ANC will accordingly continue to be vigorous in the manner in which it manages the relationship with this sector. This will be characterised by co-operation over the need to attract investment for the creation of jobs, promotion of technological advances, encouraging competition.  Equally, there will be contestation where there is typical monopoly behaviour, price fixing and rent-seeking. Such inherently anti-competitive behaviour will be addressed through regulation, legislation and policies and will involve utilising the Competition Commission to drive correct behaviour In doing all the above, the fate of SA is inextricably linked to that of the African continent. This will be expressed through investment, trade and peace attempts as we play our part in the African Union and all its structures.