South African National Civic Organisation This 54th National Conference of the leader of society affords the revolutionary alliance and the Mass Democratic Movement an opportunity to reclaim its revolutionary conscientiousness and recommit to the advancement of the National Democratic Revolution (NDR) as we rebuild, renew and reposition the African National Congress (ANC) as a strategic centre of power to serve all people of South Africa.    This gathering of activists and festival of ideas must rise above growing factionalism, self-interest and patronage tendencies that seek to redefine the character of the movement, i.e. if the ANC is to emerge from this watershed conference as a united force to carry out its historic mission to create a united, non-racial, non-sexist, equitable and democratic society. South African Communist Party The South African Communist Party salutes the delegates to this historic 54th National Conference of our strategic ally, the African National Congress. In saluting the delegates to this Conference we trust that you appreciate that the future of the ANC, the future of our Alliance, and therefore the prospects for the sustained advance, deepening and defence of our national democratic revolution lie, in many respects, in your hands.  The 54th National Conference of the ANC has the potential to impact on the future viability of our Alliance. In wishing delegates and leadership to the Conference well, we urge you to agree on policies and a leadership collective that will move the ANC out of the current trend of decline. Congress of South African Trade Unions The Congress of South African Trade Unions (COSATU) on behalf of more than 1, 7 million of its members wishes the African National Congress a successful and productive 54th National Conference.  The unity of the ANC is sacrosanct. The delegates in this conference should work to foster and defend not just the unity of the ANC but of our people in general. This conference should be about the restoration of unity and cohesion within the movement as a whole, as well as building confidence and hope amongst the masses of our people ahead of the national elections in 2019.  COSATU trusts that this 54th National Conference would hopefully lay a foundation and develop a programme of action to rebuild the ANC and our revolutionary Alliance. We wish all the delegates well in their deliberations and we hope that they will show discipline and successfully carry their mandates from their branches.  Aluta Continua!