Staff Reporter “President Oliver Tambo embodied be values of the ANC. He represents the best of the ANC” ANC Secretary General, Gwede Mantashe to the South African Broadcasting Corporation (SABC) in Auckland Park The Secretary General was speaking to the SABC following its simultaneous #ORTambo100 Special Broadcast on no less than four (4) National Radio Stations yesterday. The broadcast initiated by the SABC, launched the 100 days countdown to President Oliver Tambo’s birthday on October 27. Had President Oliver Tambo lived longer, he would have been turning 100 years on that date. The longest serving President on the ANC, President Oliver Tambo “had a Christian background and a very deep commitment as a revolutionary” Mantashe quoted Comrade Pallo Jordan who also formed part of the panel on the radio broadcast. “He loved freedom for others, not for himself” Mantashe added. Asked about the lessons that we can learn from a leader such as President Oliver Tambo, Mantashe said “We learn that being in a position must never take away humility from you. You must always be responsive to the issues people raise” “If people have concerns, don’t defend yourself. Confront their concerns and address them. You must always sacrifice what is dear to you for the betterment of the lives of the people” he added. A committed President Oliver Tambo never did things “halfheartedly”. Like he did, “As a leader, put your all in what you do for the people” the Secretary General of the governing party said. “We must talk more about him (President OR Tambo), so that future generations can learn about him” Mantashe added. Asked about state capture, the Secretary General gave a stern response that “State Capture is cancer that needs to be dealt with”. “We are very determined to deal with state capture and correct it. Resources of the state must go where they are needed. They must never be channeled to other programmes that have nothing to do with serving the people” Mantashe added. “Ours is the preparedness to serve not to benefit” Mantashe Asked about the state of the economy, Mantashe said “Projections are that we will get a very moderate growth this quarter, meaning, we will break the recession at least. Then we can deal with the credit downgrading that has seen us being rated as junk status” “The economy must be sector based. Sectors must pay particular attention and perform individually. It is a collection of sectors that will take us to a growth trajectory” he added. Speaking on the upcoming ANC NEC Lekgotla, Mantashe said “The Lekgotla of the ANC, must put details on what should be done to turn the economy around and create employment” “We must strive for humility, selflessness, commitment to serve, like President OR Tambo did” Mantashe concluded